The Streams abstraction is the foundation for all "collection" oriented feature in ShiftSpace. Groups, tagging, following are all built on top of stream. Access to Streams are controlled by Permissions.

h2. Schema

<pre>
{
  "type": "stream",
  "meta": <string>,
  "createdBy": <string>,
  "displayName": <string>,
  "uniqueName": <string>,
  "created": <string: a utc format parseable date string>,
  "modified": <string: a utc format parseable date string>,
  "private": <bool>,
  "objectRef": <string: "type:id">
}
</pre>

*meta*: The type specified, i.e. "group"
*createdBy*: Author of the stream.
*displayName*: User readable string for the stream.
*uniqueName*: Globally unique user readable string for the stream.
*created*: created date. Cannot be modified after stream creation.
*modified*: last modified date.
*private*: bool whether the stream is publicly visible.
*objectRef*: uniquely specifies a document of which the stream is about.

h2. REST API

h3. Creating a Stream

Creates a new stream. The user is automatically set as the root user for the stream. Header *Content-type* must be set to *application/json*.

h4. url

<pre>
POST /stream
</pre>

h4. parameters

A JSON string conforming to the Stream schema.

h4. returns

The newly created Stream.

h3. Reading a Stream

Returns a Stream by id. Only allowed if the user has read access to the stream or the user is running as admin.

h4. url

<pre>
GET /stream/id
</pre>

h4. returns

A Stream.

h3. Updating a Stream

Update Stream. Header *Content-type* must be set to *application/json*.

h4. url

<pre>
PUT /stream/id
</pre>

h4. parameters

A JSON string conforming the mutable fields of the Stream schema.

h3. Deleting a Stream

Remove a Stream. This operation is not allowed if there is content created by other users on the Stream. Only the Stream owner an server admin (not stream admin) user may attempt to delete a stream.

h4. url

<pre>
DELETE /stream/id
</pre>

h4. returns

ack

h3. Subscribing to a Stream

Subscribes the logged in user to a stream. A user may do this only if there is a corresponding Permission giving at least join access to the stream. Join access can only be granted by stream admins or the stream owner.

h4. url

<pre>
POST /stream/id/subscribe
</pre>

h4. returns

The updated User.

h3. Unsubscribing from a Stream

Unsubscribes the user from a stream. The stream id will be removed from the user's streams array field.

h4. url

<pre>
POST /stream/id/unsubscribe
</pre>

h4. returns

The updated user.